Cortex-M33 Instruction Tracing Without a Debugger (#169)
memfault/interrupt: _drafts/instruction-tracing-mtb-m33.md

---
title: "Cortex-M33 Instruction Tracing Without a Debugger"
description: "A step by step guide on how to configure and leverage the Cortex M33 Micro Trace Buffer (MTB) for instruction tracing using Dialog Semiconductor's DA14695 MCU"
tag: [cortex-m]
author: chris
---

> In a previous post, we have talked about debugging memory corruption issues by making use of [watchpoints]({% post_url 2020-09-16-cortex-m-watchpoints %}). You may recall in that post we had to _reproduce_ the failure so we could halt the core with a watchpoint installed and debug when it happened.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In a previous post, we talked about debugging memory corruption issues by making use of [watchpoints]({% post_url 2020-09-16-cortex-m-watchpoints %}). You may recall in that post we had to _reproduce_ the failure so we could halt the core with a watchpoint installed and debug when it happened.
```

        try:
            args = parser.parse_args(list(filter(None, unicode_args.split(" "))))
        except GdbArgumentParseError:
            return

        self.decode(limit=args.limit)

Mtb()
```

## Example Project

Now that we have put together code to configure and decode MTB info, let's try it out! In the following sections, we will make use of the following setup to examine the MTB:

- a DA14695 Development Kit – USB[^1] (ARM Cortex-M33) as our development board
- SEGGER JLinkGDBServer[^2] as our gdbserver (V6.84a)
- GCC 9.3.1 / GNU Arm Embedded Toolchain as our compiler[^3]
- GNU Make as our build system

### Compiling and Flashing Project

#### Launch JLinkGDBServer

```bash
$ JLinkGDBServer  -if swd -device DA14695 -nogui
```

#### Clone, Compile & Flash

```bash
$ git clone https://github.com/memfault/interrupt.git
$ cd example/mtb-m33/

# Build
$ make
Compiling main.c
Compiling startup.c
Compiling mtb.c
// ...
Linking library
Generated build/da1469x.elf

# Flash & Debug
$ make flash
(gdb)
```

> Note the example App loads code directly into RAM so you will have to re-flash the application using `make flash` after running a test case.

### Basic Usage Example

> The default mode for the test application does nothing exciting but will serve as a good way to sanity check our decoder is working as expected. When the application start's up it enters an infinite loop. The loop halts with a breakpoint instruction every five iterations:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The default mode for the test application does nothing exciting but will serve as a good way to sanity check our decoder is working as expected. When the application starts up, it enters an infinite loop. The loop halts with a breakpoint instruction every five iterations:
```

Let's load our python gdb script and take a look at the decoded data!

```
(gdb) mtb
Begin Trace Session
>S: 0x20000510 - mtb_enable @ ./mtb.c:35
 D: 0x20000368 - main @ ./main.c:168
>S: 0x2000036e - main @ ./main.c:169
 D: 0x20000324 - infinite_loop @ ./main.c:151
>S: 0x20000348 - infinite_loop @ ./main.c:156
 D: 0x2000032a - infinite_loop @ ./main.c:154
>S: 0x20000348 - infinite_loop @ ./main.c:156
 D: 0x2000032a - infinite_loop @ ./main.c:154
>S: 0x20000348 - infinite_loop @ ./main.c:156
 D: 0x2000032a - infinite_loop @ ./main.c:154
>S: 0x20000348 - infinite_loop @ ./main.c:156
 D: 0x2000032a - infinite_loop @ ./main.c:154
```

Neat, what we are looking at here is a trace of the entire instruction flow up to the breakpoint.

If we want to view the exact instructions executed we can take the destination address from the previous packet and the source from the next packet and dissasemble the range with gdb. We see the `0x20000348` we identified above has been recorded in the trace.

For example for the first `D` -> `S` transition we have above:

```

> (gdb) disassemble 0x20000368,0x2000036e+4

Reviewer: MABYE: Use `/s` argument to print the source code inline

   0x20000324 <infinite_loop+0>:	push	{r7}
   0x20000326 <infinite_loop+2>:	sub	sp, #12
   0x20000328 <infinite_loop+4>:	add	r7, sp, #0
   0x2000032a <infinite_loop+6>:	ldr	r3, [r7, #4]
   0x2000032c <infinite_loop+8>:	adds	r3, #1
   0x2000032e <infinite_loop+10>:	str	r3, [r7, #4]
   0x20000330 <infinite_loop+12>:	ldr	r1, [r7, #4]
   0x20000332 <infinite_loop+14>:	ldr	r3, [pc, #28]	; (0x20000350 <infinite_loop+44>)
   0x20000334 <infinite_loop+16>:	smull	r2, r3, r3, r1
   0x20000338 <infinite_loop+20>:	asrs	r2, r3, #1
   0x2000033a <infinite_loop+22>:	asrs	r3, r1, #31
   0x2000033c <infinite_loop+24>:	subs	r2, r2, r3
   0x2000033e <infinite_loop+26>:	mov	r3, r2
   0x20000340 <infinite_loop+28>:	lsls	r3, r3, #2
   0x20000342 <infinite_loop+30>:	add	r3, r2
   0x20000344 <infinite_loop+32>:	subs	r2, r1, r3
   0x20000346 <infinite_loop+34>:	cmp	r2, #0
   0x20000348 <infinite_loop+36>:	bne.n	0x2000032a <infinite_loop+6>
```

Neat, so two trace packets (16 bytes of data) tells us the exact last 23 instructions which were executed by the processor! Both ranges examined end with branch instructions as expected. Our decoder appears to be working as expected!

> ### Stack Overflow Debug Example
> 
> #### Context

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Stack Overflow Debug Example

Let's now go over an example of how to debug a stack overflow using the MTB.

#### Context
```

Most RTOS' implement a simple stack overflow detection scheme.

First, when a new task is created the stack is scrubbed with a known pattern. For example, for FreeRTOS[^3] it looks like

```c
    /* Avoid dependency on memset() if it is not required. */
    #if ( tskSET_NEW_STACKS_TO_KNOWN_VALUE == 1 )
        {
            /* Fill the stack with a known value to assist debugging. */
            ( void ) memset( pxNewTCB->pxStack, ( int ) tskSTACK_FILL_BYTE, ( size_t ) ulStackDepth * sizeof( StackType_t ) );
        }
    #endif /* tskSET_NEW_STACKS_TO_KNOWN_VALUE */
```

> Then, everytime a task context switch takes place the bottom of the stack is checked to see if it matches the known pattern. The FreeRTOS logic looks like this:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Then, every time a task context switch takes place, the bottom of the stack is checked to see if it matches the known pattern. The FreeRTOS logic looks like this:
```

>S: 0x20002bf2 - vPortExitCritical @ ./freertos_kernel/portable/GCC/ARM_CM4F/portmacro.h:231
 D: 0x20001f1a - xQueueReceive @ ./freertos_kernel/queue.c:1378
>S: 0x20001f1e - xQueueReceive @ ./freertos_kernel/queue.c:1378
 D: 0x2000045e - prvQueuePongTask @ ./main.c:86
>S: 0x20000468 - prvQueuePongTask @ ./main.c:91
 D: 0x200003ec - bad_asm_function @ ./main.c:75
>S: 0x200003f6 - bad_asm_function @ ./main.c:75
 D: 0xbf00de4c - 0xbf00de4c @ ?:?
>S: 0xbf00de4c - Exception (or debug) Entry from 0xbf00de4c @ ?:?
 D: 0x20000486 - HardFault_Handler @ ./main.c:107
>S: 0x20000488 - HardFault_Handler @ ./main.c:107
 D: 0x200004e0 - mtb_disable @ ./mtb.c:41
```

From the trace we can immediately see what was executing prior to the bad jump to `0xbf00de4c`. In this case it is a suspiciously named function that I instrumented, `bad_asm_function()`:

```c
// for illustrative purposes, an assembly function that clobbers
// the lr and then jumps to a bogus address
__attribute__((naked))
static void bad_asm_function(void) {
  __asm("mov r0, 0 \n"
        "ldr r2, =3204505165 \n"
        "mov lr, 0 \n"
        "bx r2 \n"
        );
}
```

> But hopefullt, the example conveys the general idea how this type of trace can be useful for root causing this class of bug!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Although contrived, I hope the example conveys the general idea how this type of trace can be useful for root causing this class of bug!
```
